PROLOG2 - a small Prolog for LISPF4
===================================

prolog2.lisp is a self-contained Prolog interpreter written in LISPF4.

It is new code.  It is NOT a repair or reconstruction of prolog.lisp,
which is a different and much older experiment; see the note at the end
of this file.  The two packages share no code and no function names, and
both may be loaded at the same time.

	(READFILE "prolog2.lisp")

prolog2.lisp needs nothing but the base system.


Terms
-----

Terms are ordinary S-expressions.  An atom whose print name begins with a
question mark is a logic variable:

	?X   ?Y   ?ANSWER		variables
	TOM  42  (LIKES ?X WINE)	everything else is a constant or
					a compound term

Because terms are S-expressions, a Prolog list is just a Lisp list, and
the usual head/tail pattern is written as a dotted pair:

	(?HEAD . ?TAIL)		matches (A B C) with ?HEAD=A ?TAIL=(B C)

NIL is the empty list, as in Lisp.


Clauses
-------

A clause is asserted with <-, which does not evaluate its arguments:

	(<- (PARENT TOM BOB))				a fact
	(<- (ANC ?X ?Z) (PARENT ?X ?Y) (ANC ?Y ?Z))	a rule

The first argument is the head; the rest are the goals of the body.
Clauses are tried in the order asserted.  Clauses are kept on the
PCLAUSES property of the predicate name, so a predicate name does not
collide with a Lisp function of the same name.


Queries
-------

PQ solves a query and prints each solution.  It does not evaluate its
arguments.  Several goals form a conjunction:

	(PQ (PARENT TOM ?WHO))
	(PQ (PARENT ?X ?Y) (PARENT ?Y ?Z))

It prints one block per solution, giving every variable of the query,
and returns the number of solutions -- or prints NO and returns NIL when
there are none.

PQUERY is the programmatic form.  It takes an evaluated list of goals and
an optional depth override, and returns a list of binding lists, one per
solution:

	(PQUERY '((PARENT TOM ?WHO)) NIL)

PINST instantiates a term against one of those binding lists, which is
how a program reads an answer out:

	(PINST '?WHO (CAR (PQUERY '((PARENT TOM ?WHO)) NIL)))


Built-in predicates
-------------------

	(TRUE)			succeeds once
	(FAIL)			always fails
	!			cut -- see below
	(= ?X TERM)		succeeds if ?X unifies with TERM
	(NOT GOAL ...)		succeeds if GOAL ... has no solution
	(IS ?X FORM)		evaluates FORM as Lisp, unifies with ?X
	(LISP FORM)		evaluates FORM as Lisp, succeeds if non-NIL

IS and LISP instantiate the form first, so the variables of the query
appear in it as their values:

	(<- (FACT 0 1) !)
	(<- (FACT ?N ?F) (LISP (GREATERP ?N 0))
			 (IS ?M (SUB1 ?N))
			 (FACT ?M ?G)
			 (IS ?F (TIMES ?N ?G)))
	(PQ (FACT 6 ?F))		?F = 720

If any variable in the form is still unbound when the goal is reached,
the goal fails rather than calling EVAL on an unbound variable.

These names are reserved: a clause whose head names a built-in is
refused.  The list is in *PBUILTINS*.


Cut
---

! commits to the clause it appears in.  On backtracking it discards the
remaining clauses of its own predicate AND the remaining solutions of the
goals to its left in the same body.  The usual idiom works:

	(<- (MAX ?X ?Y ?X) (LISP (NULL (LESSP ?X ?Y))) !)
	(<- (MAX ?X ?Y ?Y))
	(PQ (MAX 5 3 ?M))		?M = 5, one solution

Without the cut the second clause would also match and offer ?M = 3.


Database
--------

	(PLISTING)		print every clause
	(PLISTING 'ANC)		print one predicate
	(PCLEAR 'ANC)		erase one predicate
	(PCLEAR)		erase everything

PLISTING prints each clause in the form you would type to assert it.
*PPREDS* is the list of predicates that currently have clauses.


Limits
------

The solver is depth first and collects every solution it finds, so an
unbounded search would not return.  Two globals bound it:

	*PDEPTH*	resolution steps allowed on one branch (default 40)
	*PMAX*		solutions collected before stopping    (default 100)

Either may be set to NIL to disable it, which is only safe for a program
known to terminate.  When a limit is what stopped the search, PQ says so,
so a short answer is never silently mistaken for a complete one.

*PDEPTH* defaults to 40 because each resolution step is a level of Lisp
recursion, and the default parameter stack overflows at about 60.  A
larger stack raises the ceiling in proportion:

	lispf4 -s 40000 basic.img		then (SETQ *PDEPTH* 500)

Raising *PDEPTH* without also raising the stack will overflow it.

Unification has no occurs check, which is standard Prolog practice.
Unifying ?X with a term containing ?X builds a circular structure, and
printing it will not terminate.


Known defect
------------

Under sustained cell garbage collection, a query occasionally returns a
wrong answer.  Measured on a REV of a six element list repeated in a
loop, roughly one query in 150 to 300 comes back with a variable left
unbound that should have been bound, or with the wrong number of
solutions.  To reproduce, run that query a few hundred times and compare
each answer against the known result.

What is established about it:

  - It happens only when the cell collector runs.  Given enough cell
    space that no collection occurs, several hundred consecutive queries
    are all correct.  Failures become more frequent as cell space is
    reduced and collections become more frequent.
  - It is deterministic.  For a fixed cell space the same iteration
    fails on every run, including under AddressSanitizer.
  - AddressSanitizer and UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer report nothing, so
    it is not an out of bounds access in the C code.
  - The clause database is not damaged; it compares equal to its
    expected value at every iteration, including the failing one.

Ruled out as the cause: the loop construct used to drive the test (a
PROG/GO loop, RPTQ, and a recursive driver all show it), APPEND (4000
iterations across 9 collections are clean), interning of renamed
variables (the failure predates and survives the change to allocate
conses instead), the depth limit (REV of six elements needs 28 steps
against a limit of 40), and generic deep recursion with consing.

The cause has not been isolated, and whether it is a fault in this
package or in the interpreter's cell collector is not yet known.  Until
it is, treat a single answer from a long-running search as needing
confirmation.  Running with more cell space, for example

	lispf4 -c 1000000 basic.img

makes collections rarer and so makes the fault rarer, but does not
remove it.


Relationship to prolog.lisp
---------------------------

prolog.lisp is an older, unrelated experiment: a structure-sharing Prolog
in the style of the early Edinburgh implementations, using molecules and
an explicit record heap.  It has never been complete in this repository.
The source is truncated -- SEEK ends mid-COND, in the initial commit as
well as every commit since -- and it contains no clause database and no
way to assert a clause, so no query can succeed.  Its primitives
(MAKHUNK, MAKRECORD, ALLOCATE, IMM, SETIMM) do work, and POP, PUSH and
TRANSFER have been corrected, but the interpreter proper cannot be
recovered from what survives.

prolog2.lisp was written to provide the functionality, not to guess at
the missing code.  prolog.lisp is left as it stands.
